Add developer guide page (#114)
Cambridge-ICCS/FTorch: pages/developer.md

title: Developer Guide

If you would like to contribute to the FTorch project, or modify the code at a deeper
level, please see below for guidance.

[TOC]

## Getting involved

Contributions and collaborations are welcome.

For bugs, feature requests, and clear suggestions for improvement please

> [open an issue](https://github.com/Cambridge-ICCS/FTorch/issues).

Reviewer: Suggest this URL instead: https://github.com/Cambridge-ICCS/FTorch/issues/new/choose, given that the link here is used again in the next sentence anyway.

Author: Should be done in https://github.com/Cambridge-ICCS/FTorch/commit/403b2c752ce7610dec37ab5787a7a0406c133e84

If you have built something upon _FTorch_ that would be useful to others, or can
address an [open issue](https://github.com/Cambridge-ICCS/FTorch/issues), please
[fork the repository](https://github.com/Cambridge-ICCS/FTorch/fork) and open a
pull request.

### Code of Conduct
Everyone participating in the FTorch project, and in particular in the
issue tracker, pull requests, and social media activity, is expected to treat other
people with respect and, more generally, to follow the guidelines articulated in the
[Python Community Code of Conduct](https://www.python.org/psf/codeofconduct/).

## Extending the API

If you have a Torch functionality that you wish to bring in from the C++ API to
the FTorch Fortran API the steps are generally as follows:

* Modify `ctorch.cpp` to create a C++ version of the function that accesses `torch::`.
* Add the function to the header file `ctorch.h`

> * Modify `ftorch.fypp` to create a fortran version of the function

Reviewer: Fortran

Author: Damnitt!! Should be done in https://github.com/Cambridge-ICCS/FTorch/pull/114/commits/403b2c752ce7610dec37ab5787a7a0406c133e84

  that binds to the version in `ctorch.cpp`.

Details of C++ functionalities available to be wrapped can be found
in the [libtorch C++ API](https://pytorch.org/cppdocs/).

As this is an open-source project we appreciate any contributions
back from users that have extended the functionality.
If you have done something but don't know where to start with

> open-source contributions please get in touch!

Reviewer: Worth saying how to get in touch.

Reviewer 2: perhaps we should guide to opening a discussion rather than an email? emails tend to get stale v. quickly. Or we can think about an FTorch email... but that might be more effort.

Reviewer: Yeah I agree, the recommended contact method should be via GitHub.

Author: I agree with Elliott - we have already had 2 - 3 people contact via email because they don't use GH.
Perhaps we use the ICCS email address as a catch-all with a request to forward to the RSE team?

Author: Update in https://github.com/Cambridge-ICCS/FTorch/pull/114/commits/403b2c752ce7610dec37ab5787a7a0406c133e84 see if you're happy with this. Would prefer not to use a 'middle-person' emaiul, but also think it's better to use a persistent one rather than anyone's personal one.

Reviewer: Looks good, thanks.

Reviewer 2: I agree with @ElliottKasoar too. That some people may not want to openly ask for help.

My issue with the ICCS email is none of us actually read it / have access... so there is high chance they get lost. Ideally we would need an FTorch specific email but this is more admin overhead to monitor and maintain.

Perhaps we stick to a personal email until we get something better :shrug:

Reviewer 2: so maybe Jack seeming as you are most active on Ftorch we use your email if you are happy with that?

If not I am happy to stick with ICCS email... but we need to either get access or make sure the maintainers of the email forward FTorch queries to us directly.

(unless you already have access and it's just me that doesn't)

Author: Yep, that's fine. Updated accordingly in https://github.com/Cambridge-ICCS/FTorch/pull/114/commits/e7afadd035aae25a301db52626a9b6725dc0c9f3.
I specify GitHub as the preferred option, and we can always update if required at a later stage.

### Fortran source and Fypp

The Fortran source code for FTorch is contained in `src/ftorch.f90`.
However, this file should not be edited directly, but instead generated from
`src/ftorch.fypp`.
This is a file that is set up to be run through the
[Fypp](https://fypp.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html) preprocessor.
We use this because we want to create a pleasant interface of single function calls.
The nature of Fortran means that this requires a lot of repeated combinations of
array shapes and data types under interface structures.
By using Fypp we can generate these programatically.

Fypp can be installed via pip:
```
pip install fypp
```

To generate the Fortran code run:
```
fypp src/ftorch.fypp src/ftorch.f90
```

_Note: Generally it would be advisable to provide only the `.fypp` source code to
reduce duplication and confusion. However, because it is a relatively small file

> and many of our users wish to _"clone-and-go"_ rather than develop, we provide both.<br>

Reviewer 2: just curious why we have a line break (`<br>`) here but not really anywhere else. Was it from an editor. Will two newlines suffice? or am I missing something?

Author: Issue with FORD where `\` doesn't to work for a line break.
Issue opened here: https://github.com/Fortran-FOSS-Programmers/ford/issues/646
I could perhaps use two trailing whitespaces, but am not keen on this as it is 'invisible' and sometimes get removed by over-zealous editors/IDEs.

Two newlines would be a full return rather than a break.

Development should only take place in `ftorch.fypp`, however._

### git hook

In order to streamline the process of uploading we provide a pre-commit hook in
[`.githooks/pre-commit`](https://github.com/Cambridge-ICCS/FTorch/blob/main/.githooks/pre-commit).
This will check that both the `.fypp` and `.f90` files have been updated together in a
synchronous fashion before a commmit can take place.
If this does not happen then the second line of defence (GitHub continuous integration)
will fail following the commit.

> Use of the hook is not automatic and needs to be enabled by the developer:
> ```
> cp .githooks/pre-commit .git/hooks/
> chmod +x .git/pre-commit
> ```
> after they have inspected it and are happy with its contents.

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
Use of the hook is not automatic and needs to be enabled by the developer (after they have inspected it and are happy with its contents). Hooks can be enabled with the following commands:
```
cp .githooks/pre-commit .git/hooks/
chmod +x .git/pre-commit
```
````

Author: This should be incorporated into https://github.com/Cambridge-ICCS/FTorch/pull/114/commits/403b2c752ce7610dec37ab5787a7a0406c133e84

### General guidelines

> * Match optional argument defaults between Fortran, C, and C++<br>

Reviewer 2: again `<br>` here too. Not big deal just curious.

> * Match optional argument defaults between Fortran, C, and C++<br>
>   Principle of Least Surprise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Match optional argument defaults between Fortran, C, and C++ ([principle of least surprise](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principle_of_least_astonishment)).
```

Author: I knew the acronym was POLA and couldn't figure out why it didn't match 😅

Author: This should be incorporated into https://github.com/Cambridge-ICCS/FTorch/pull/114/commits/403b2c752ce7610dec37ab5787a7a0406c133e84

Reviewer 2: thanks

* Handle `torch::Error` and `std::exception` in the C++ functions by catching and
  printing to screen before exiting cleanly.

## Documentation

The API documentation for FTorch is generated using 
[FORD](https://forddocs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
For detailed information refer to the 
[FORD User Guide](https://forddocs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user_guide/index.html),
but as a quick-start:

* `!!` is used to signify documentation.
* Documentation comes _after_ whatever it is documenting (inline or subsequent line).
* Documentation can precede an item if designated using `!>`.

FORD is pip installable:
```
pip install ford
```
To generate the documentation run:
```
ford FTorch.md
```
from the root of the repository.

`FTorch.md` is the FORD index file, API documentation is automatically generated, and
any further items are contained in `pages/` as markdown files.

Documentation of the C functions in `ctorch.h` is provided

> by [Doxygen](https://www.doxygen.nl/index.html).

Reviewer: How to generate it from the source?

Author: Something for future development.
